
_THE MAN FROM ARCHANGEL._

On the fourth day of March, in the year 1867, being at that time in my five-
and-twentieth year, I wrote down the following words in my note-book, the
result of much mental perturbation and conflict:—

"The solar system, amidst a countless number of other systems as large as
itself, rolls ever silently through space in the direction of the
constellation of Hercules. The great spheres of which it is composed spin and
spin through the eternal void ceaselessly and noiselessly. Of these one of the
smallest and most insignificant is that conglomeration of solid and of liquid
particles which we have named the earth. It whirls onwards now as it has done
before my birth, and will do after my death — a revolving mystery, coming none
know whence, and going none know whither. Upon the outer crust of this moving
mass crawl many mites, of whom I, John McVittie, am one, helpless, impotent,
being dragged aimlessly through space. Yet such is the state of things amongst
us that the little energy and glimmering of reason which I possess is entirely
taken up with the labours which are necessary in order to procure certain
metallic disks, wherewith I may purchase the chemical elements necessary to
build up my ever-wasting tissues, and keep a roof over me to shelter me from
the inclemency of the weather. I thus have no thought to expend upon the vital
questions which surround me on every side. Yet, miserable entity as I am, I
can still at times feel some degree of happiness, and am even — save the mark!
— puffed up occasionally with a sense of my own importance."

These words, as I have said, I wrote down in my note-book, and they reflected
accurately the thoughts which I found rooted far down in my soul, ever present
and unaffected by the passing emotions of the hour. Every day for seven months
I read over my words, and every day when I had finished them I said to myself,
"Well done, John McVittie; you have said the thought which was in you. You
have reduced things to their least common measure!" At last, however, came a
time when my uncle, McVittie of Glencairn, died — the same who was at one time
chairman of committees of the House of Commons. He divided his great wealth
among his many nephews, and I found myself with sufficient to provide amply
for my wants during the remainder of my life, and became at the same time
owner of a bleak tract of land upon the coast of Caithness, which I think the
old man must have bestowed upon me in derision, for it was sandy and
valueless, and he had ever a grim sense of humour. Up to this time I had been
an attorney in a midland town in England. Now I saw that I could put my
thoughts into effect, and, leaving all petty and sordid aims, could elevate my
mind by the study of the secrets of nature. My departure from my English home
was somewhat accelerated by the fact that I had nearly slain a man in a
quarrel, for my temper was fiery, and I was apt to forget my own strength when
enraged. There was no legal action taken in the matter, but the papers yelped
at me, and folk looked askance when I met them. It ended by my cursing them
and their vile, smoke-polluted town, and hurrying to my northern possession,
where I might at last find peace and an opportunity for solitary study and
contemplation. I borrowed from my capital before I went, and so was able to
take with me a choice collection of the most modern philosophical instruments
and books, together with chemicals and such other things as I might need in my
retirement.

The land which I had inherited was a narrow strip, consisting mostly of sand,
and extending for rather over two miles round the coast of Mansie Bay, in
Caithness. Upon this strip there had been a rambling, grey-stone building —
when erected or wherefore none could tell me — and this I had repaired, so
that it made a dwelling quite good enough for one of my simple tastes. One
room was my laboratory, another my sitting-room, and in a third, just under
the sloping roof, I slung the hammock in which I always slept. There were
three other rooms, but I left them vacant, except one which was given over to
the old crone who kept house for me. Save the Youngs and the McLeods, who were
fisher-folk living round at the other side of Fergus Ness, there were no other
people for many miles in each direction. In front of the house was the great
bay, behind it were two long barren hills, capped by other loftier ones
beyond. There was a glen between the hills, and when the wind was from the
land it used to sweep down this with a melancholy sough and whisper among the
branches of the fir trees beneath my attic window.

I dislike my fellow-mortals. Justice compels me to add that they appear for
the most part to dislike me. I hate their little crawling ways, their
conventionalities, their deceits, their narrow rights and wrongs. They take
offence at my brusque outspokenness, my disregard for their social laws, my
impatience of all constraint. Among my books and my drugs in my lonely den at
Mansie I could let the great drove of the human race pass onwards with their
politics and inventions and tittle-tattle, and I remained behind stagnant and
happy. Not stagnant either, for I was working in my own little groove, and
making progress. I have reason to believe that Dalton's atomic theory is
founded upon error, and I know that mercury is not an element.

During the day I was busy with my distillations and analyses. Often I forgot
my meals, and when old Madge summoned me to my tea I found my dinner lying
untouched upon the table. At night I read Bacon, Descartes, Spinoza, Kant —
all those who have pried into what is unknowable. They are all fruitless and
empty, barren of result, but prodigal of polysyllables, reminding me of men
who, while digging for gold, have turned up many worms, and then exhibit them
exultantly as being what they sought. At times a restless spirit would come
upon me, and I would walk thirty and forty miles without rest or breaking
fast. On these occasions, when I used to stalk through the country villages,
gaunt, unshaven, and dishevelled, the mothers would rush into the road and
drag their children indoors, and the rustics would swarm out of their pot-
houses to gaze at me. I believe that I was known far and wide as the "mad
laird o' Mansie." It was rarely, however, that I made these raids into the
country, for I usually took my exercise upon my own beach, where I soothed my
spirit with strong black tobacco, and made the ocean my friend and my
confidant.

What companion is there like the great restless, throbbing sea? What human
mood is there which it does not match and sympathise with? There are none so
gay but that they may feel gayer when they listen to its merry turmoil, and
see the long green surges racing in, with the glint of the sunbeams in their
sparkling crests. But when the grey waves toss their heads in anger, and the
wind screams above them, goading them on to madder and more tumultuous
efforts, then the darkest-minded of men feels that there is a melancholy
principle in Nature which is as gloomy as his own thoughts. When it was calm
in the Bay of Mansie the surface would be as clear and bright as a sheet of
silver, broken only at one spot some little way from the shore, where a long
black line projected out of the water looking like the jagged back of some
sleeping monster. This was the top of the dangerous ridge of rocks known to
the fishermen as the "ragged reef o' Mansie." When the wind blew from the east
the waves would break upon it like thunder, and the spray would be tossed far
over my house and up to the hills behind. The bay itself was a bold and noble
one, but too much exposed to the northern and eastern gales, and too much
dreaded for its reef, to be much used by mariners. There was something of
romance about this lonely spot. I have lain in my boat upon a calm day, and
peering over the edge, I have seen far down the flickering ghostly forms of
great fish—fish, as it seemed to me, such as naturalist never knew, and which
my imagination transformed into the genii of that desolate bay. Once, as I
stood by the brink of the waters upon a quiet night, a great cry, as of a
woman in hopeless grief, rose from the bosom of the deep, and swelled out upon
the still air, now sinking and now rising, for a space of thirty seconds. This
I heard with my own ears.

In this strange spot, with the eternal hills behind me and the eternal sea in
front, I worked and brooded for more than two years unpestered by my fellow-
men. By degrees I had trained my old servant into habits of silence, so that
she now rarely opened her lips, though I doubt not that when twice a year she
visited her relations in Wick, her tongue during those few days made up for
its enforced rest. I had come almost to forget that I was a member of the
human family, and to live entirely with the dead whose books I pored over,
when a sudden incident occurred which threw all my thoughts into a new
channel.

Three rough days in June had been succeeded by one calm and peaceful one.
There was not a breath of air that evening. The sun sank down in the west
behind a line of purple clouds, and the smooth surface of the bay was gashed
with scarlet streaks. Along the beach the pools left by the tide showed up
like gouts of blood against the yellow sand, as if some wounded giant had
toilfully passed that way, and had left these red traces of his grievous hurt
behind him. As the darkness closed in, certain ragged clouds which had lain
low on the eastern horizon coalesced and formed a great irregular cumulus. The
glass was still low, and I knew that there was mischief brewing. About nine
o'clock a dull moaning sound came up from the sea, as from a creature who,
much harassed, learns that the hour of suffering has come round again. At ten
a sharp breeze sprang up from the eastward. At eleven it had increased to a
gale, and by midnight the most furious storm was raging which I ever remember
upon that weather-beaten coast.

As I went to bed the shingle and sea-weed were pattering up against my attic-
window, and the wind was screaming as though every gust were a lost soul. By
that time the sounds of the tempest had become a lullaby to me. I knew that
the grey walls of the old house would buffet it out, and for what occurred in
the world outside I had small concern. Old Madge was usually as callous to
such things as I was myself. It was a surprise to me when, about three in the
morning, I was awoke by the sound of a great knocking at my door and excited
cries in the wheezy voice of my housekeeper. I sprang out of my hammock, and
roughly demanded of her what was the matter.

"Eh, maister, maister!" she screamed in her hateful dialect. "Come doun, mun;
come doun! There's a muckle ship gaun ashore on the reef, and the puir folks
are a' yammerin' and ca'in' for help—and I doobt they'll a' be drooned. Oh,
Maister McVittie, come doun!"

"Hold your tongue, you hag!" I shouted back in a passion. "What is it to you
whether they are drowned or not? Get back to your bed and leave me alone." I
turned in again and drew the blankets over me. "Those men out there," I said
to myself, "have already gone through half the horrors of death. If they be
saved they will but have to go through the same once more in the space of a
few brief years. It is best therefore that they should pass away now, since
they have suffered that anticipation which is more than the pain of
dissolution." With this thought in my mind I endeavoured to compose myself to
sleep once more, for that philosophy which had taught me to consider death as
a small and trivial incident in man's eternal and ever-changing career, had
also broken me of much curiosity concerning worldly matters. On this occasion
I found, however, that the old leaven still fermented strongly in my soul. I
tossed from side to side for some minutes endeavouring to beat down the
impulses of the moment by the rules of conduct which I had framed during
months of thought. Then I heard a dull roar amid the wild shriek of the gale,
and I knew that it was the sound of a signal-gun. Driven by an uncontrollable
impulse, I rose, dressed, and having lit my pipe, walked out on to the beach.

It was pitch dark when I came outside, and the wind blew with such violence
that I had to put my shoulder against it and push my way along the shingle. My
face pringled and smarted with the sting of the gravel which was blown against
it, and the red ashes of my pipe streamed away behind me, dancing
fantastically through the darkness. I went down to where the great waves were
thundering in, and, shading my eyes with my hands to keep off the salt spray,
I peered out to sea. I could distinguish nothing, and yet it seemed to me that
shouts and great inarticulate cries were borne to me by the blasts. Suddenly
as I gazed I made out the glint of a light, and then the whole bay and the
beach were lit up in a moment by a vivid blue glare. They were burning a
coloured signal-light on board of the vessel. There she lay on her beam ends
right in the centre of the jagged reef, hurled over to such an angle that I
could see all the planking of her deck. She was a large two-masted schooner,
of foreign rig, and lay perhaps a hundred and eighty or two hundred yards from
the shore. Every spar and rope and writhing piece of cordage showed up hard
and clear under the livid light which sputtered and flickered from the highest
portion of the forecastle. Beyond the doomed ship out of the great darkness
came the long rolling lines of black waves, never ending, never tiring, with a
petulant tuft of foam here and there upon their crests. Each as it reached the
broad circle of unnatural light appeared to gather strength and volume, and to
hurry on more impetuously until, with a roar and a jarring crash, it sprang
upon its victim. Clinging to the weather shrouds I could distinctly see some
ten or twelve frightened seamen, who, when their light revealed my presence,
turned their white faces towards me and waved their hands imploringly. I felt
my gorge rise against these poor cowering worms. Why should they presume to
shirk the narrow pathway along which all that is great and noble among mankind
has travelled? There was one there who interested me more than they. He was a
tall man, who stood apart from the others, balancing himself upon the swaying
wreck as though he disdained to cling to rope or bulwark. His hands were
clasped behind his back and his head was sunk upon his breast; but even in
that despondent attitude there was a litheness and decision in his pose and in
every motion which marked him as a man little likely to yield to despair.
Indeed, I could see by his occasional rapid glances up and down and all around
him that he was weighing every chance of safety; but though he often gazed
across the raging surf to where he could see my dark figure upon the beach,
his self-respect, or some other reason forbade him from imploring my help in
any way. He stood, dark, silent, and inscrutable, looking down on the black
sea, and waiting for whatever fortune Fate might send him.

It seemed to me that that problem would very soon be settled. As I looked, an
enormous billow, topping all the others, and coming after them, like a driver
following a flock, swept over the vessel. Her foremast snapped short off, and
the men who clung to the shrouds were brushed away like a swarm of flies. With
a rending, riving sound the ship began to split in two, where the sharp back
of the Mansie reef was sawing into her keel. The solitary man upon the
forecastle ran rapidly across the deck and seized hold of a white bundle which
I had already observed, but failed to make out. As he lifted it up the light
fell upon it, and I saw that the object was a woman, with a spar lashed across
her body and under her arms in such a way that her head should always rise
above water. He bore her tenderly to the side and seemed to speak for a minute
or so to her, as though explaining the impossibility of remaining upon the
ship. Her answer was a singular one. I saw her deliberately raise her hand and
strike him across the face with it. He appeared to be silenced for a moment or
so by this; but he addressed her again, directing her, as far as I could
gather from his motions, how she should behave when in the water. She shrank
away from him, but he caught her in his arms. He stooped over her for a moment
and seemed to press his lips against her forehead. Then a great wave came
welling up against the side of the breaking vessel, and, leaning over, he
placed her upon the summit of it as gently as a child might be committed to
its cradle. I saw her white dress flickering among the foam on the crest of
the dark billow, and then the light sank gradually lower, and the riven ship
and its lonely occupant were hidden from my eyes.

As I watched those things my manhood overcame my philosophy, and I felt a
frantic impulse to be up and doing. I threw my cynicism to one side as a
garment which I might don again at leisure, and I rushed wildly to my boat and
my sculls. She was a leaky tub, but what then? Was I, who had cast many a
wistful, doubtful glance at my opium bottle, to begin now to weigh chances and
to cavil at danger? I dragged her down to the sea with the strength of a
maniac and sprang in. For a moment or two it was a question whether she could
live among the boiling surge, but a dozen frantic strokes took me through it,
half-full of water but still afloat. I was out on the unbroken waves now, at
one time climbing, climbing up the broad black breast of one, then sinking
down, down on the other side, until looking up I could see the gleam of the
foam all around me against the dark heavens. Far behind me I could hear the
wild wailings of old Madge, who, seeing me start, thought no doubt that my
madness had come to a climax. As I rowed I peered over my shoulder, until at
last on the belly of a great wave which was sweeping towards me I
distinguished the vague white outline of the woman. Stooping over, I seized
her as she swept by me, and with an effort lifted her, all sodden with water,
into the boat. There was no need to row back, for the next billow carried us
in and threw us upon the beach. I dragged the boat out of danger, and then
lifting up the woman I carried her to the house, followed by my housekeeper,
loud with congratulation and praise.

Now that I had done this thing a reaction set in upon me. I felt that my
burden lived, for I heard the faint beat of her heart as I pressed my ear
against her side in carrying her. Knowing this, I threw her down beside the
fire which Madge had lit, with as little sympathy as though she had been a
bundle of faggots. I never glanced at her to see if she were fair or no. For
many years I had cared little for the face of a woman. As I lay in my hammock
upstairs, however, I heard the old woman, as she chafed the warmth back into
her, crooning a chorus of, "Eh, the puir lassie! Eh, the bonnie lassie!" from
which I gathered that this piece of jetsam was both young and comely.

The morning after the gale was peaceful and sunny. As I walked along the long
sweep of sand I could hear the panting of the sea. It was heaving and swirling
about the reef, but along the shore it rippled in gently enough. There was no
sign of the schooner, nor was there any wreckage upon the beach, which did not
surprise me, as I knew there was a great undertow in those waters. A couple of
broad-winged gulls were hovering and skimming over the scene of the shipwreck,
as though many strange things were visible to them beneath the waves. At times
I could hear their raucous voices as they spoke to one another of what they
saw.

When I came back from my walk the woman was waiting at the door for me. I
began to wish when I saw her that I had never saved her, for here was an end
of my privacy. She was very young—at the most nineteen, with a pale, somewhat
refined face, yellow hair, merry blue eyes, and shining teeth. Her beauty was
of an ethereal type. She looked so white and light and fragile that she might
have been the spirit of that storm-foam from out of which I plucked her. She
had wreathed some of Madge's garments round her in a way which was quaint and
not unbecoming. As I strode heavily up the pathway, she put out her hands with
a pretty child-like gesture, and ran down towards me, meaning, as I surmise,
to thank me for having saved her, but I put her aside with a wave of my hand
and passed her. At this she seemed somewhat hurt, and the tears sprang into
her eyes; but she followed me into the sitting-room and watched me wistfully.
"What country do you come from?" I asked her suddenly.

She smiled when I spoke, but shook her head.

"Francais?" I asked. "Deutsch?" "Espagnol?"—each time she shook her head, and
then she rippled off into a long statement in some tongue of which I could not
understand one word.

After breakfast was over, however, I got a clue to her nationality. Passing
along the beach once more, I saw that in a cleft of the ridge a piece of wood
had been jammed. I rowed out to it in my boat, and brought it ashore. It was
part of the sternpost of a boat, and on it, or rather on the piece of wood
attached to it, was the word "Archangel," painted in strange, quaint
lettering. "So," I thought, as I paddled slowly back, "this pale damsel is a
Russian. A fit subject for the White Czar and a proper dweller on the shores
of the White Sea!" It seemed to me strange that one of her apparent refinement
should perform so long a journey in so frail a craft. When I came back into
the house, I pronounced the word "Archangel" several times in different
intonations, but she did not appear to recognise it.

I shut myself up in the laboratory all the morning, continuing a research
which I was making upon the nature of the allotropic forms of carbon and of
sulphur. When I came out at mid-day for some food, she was sitting by the
table with a needle and thread mending some rents in her clothes, which were
now dry. I resented her continued presence, but I could not turn her out on
the beach to shift for herself. Presently she presented a new phase of her
character. Pointing to herself and then to the scene of the shipwreck, she
held up one finger, by which I understood her to be asking whether she was the
only one saved. I nodded my head to indicate that she was. On this she sprang
out of the chair with a cry of great joy, and holding the garment which she
was mending over her head, and swaying it from side to side with the motion of
her body, she danced as lightly as a feather all round the room, and then out
through the open door into the sunshine. As she whirled round she sang in a
plaintive shrill voice some uncouth barbarous chant, expressive of exultation.
I called out to her, "Come in, you young fiend; come in and be silent!" but
she went on with her dance. Then she suddenly ran towards me, and catching my
hand before I could pluck it away, she kissed it. While we were at dinner she
spied one of my pencils, and taking it up she wrote the two words "Sophie
Ramusine" upon a piece of paper, and then pointed to herself as a sign that
that was her name. She handed the pencil to me, evidently expecting that I
would be equally communicative, but I put it in my pocket as a sign that I
wished to hold no intercourse with her.

Every moment of my life now I regretted the unguarded precipitancy with which
I had saved this woman. What was it to me whether she had lived or died? I was
no young, hot-headed youth to do such things. It was bad enough to be
compelled to have Madge in the house, but she was old and ugly, and could be
ignored. This one was young and lively, and so fashioned as to divert
attention from graver things. Where could I send her, and what could I do with
her? If I sent information to Wick it would mean that officials and others
would come to me, and pry, and peep, and chatter—a hateful thought. It was
better to endure her presence than that.

I soon found that there were fresh troubles in store for me. There is no place
safe from the swarming, restless race of which I am a member. In the evening,
when the sun was dipping down behind the hills, casting them into dark shadow,
but gilding the sands and casting a great glory over the sea, I went, as is my
custom, for a stroll along the beach. Sometimes on these occasions I took my
book with me. I did so on this night, and stretching myself upon a sand-dune I
composed myself to read. As I lay there I suddenly became aware of a shadow
which interposed itself between the sun and myself. Looking round, I saw, to
my great surprise, a very tall, powerful man, who was standing a few yards
off, and who, instead of looking at me, was ignoring my existence completely,
and was gazing over my head with a stern set face at the bay and the black
line of the Mansie reef. His complexion was dark, with black hair, and short
curling beard, a hawk-like nose, and golden earrings in his ears—the general
effect being wild and somewhat noble. He wore a faded velveteen jacket, a red-
flannel shirt, and high sea-boots, coming half-way up his thighs. I recognised
him at a glance as being the same man who had been left on the wreck the night
before.

"Hullo!" I said, in an aggrieved voice. "You got ashore all right, then?"

"Yes," he answered, in good English. "It was no doing of mine. The waves threw
me up. I wish to God I had been allowed to drown!" There was a slight foreign
lisp in his accent which was rather pleasing. "Two good fishermen, who live
round yonder point, pulled me out and cared for me—yet I could not honestly
thank them for it."

"Ho! ho!" thought I, "here is a man of my own kidney. Why do you wish to be
drowned?" I asked.

"Because," he cried, throwing out his long arms with a passionate, despairing
gesture, "there—there in that blue smiling bay lies my soul, my
treasure—everything that I loved and lived for."

"Well, well," I said. "People are ruined every day, but there's no use making
a fuss about it. Let me inform you that this ground on which you walk is my
ground, and that the sooner you take yourself off it the better pleased I
shall be. One of you is quite trouble enough."

"One of us?" he gasped.

"Yes—if you could take her off with you I should be still more grateful."

He gazed at me for a moment as if hardly able to realise what I said, and
then, with a wild cry, he ran away from me with prodigious speed and raced
along the sands towards my house. Never before or since have I seen a human
being run so fast. I followed as rapidly as I could, furious at this
threatened invasion, but long before I reached the house he had disappeared
through the open door. I heard a great scream from the inside, and, as I came
nearer, the sound of a man's bass voice speaking rapidly and loudly. When I
looked, in the girl Sophie Ramusine was crouching in a corner, cowering away,
with fear and loathing expressed on her averted face and in every line of her
shrinking form. The other, with his dark eyes flashing, and his outstretched
hands quivering with emotion, was pouring forth a torrent of passionate,
pleading words. He made a step forward to her as I entered, but she writhed
still further away, and uttered a sharp cry like that of a rabbit when the
weasel has him by the throat.

"Here!" I said, pulling him back from her. "This is a pretty to-do! What do
you mean? Do you think this is a wayside inn or place of public
accommodation?"

"Oh, sir," he said, "excuse me. This woman is my wife, and I feared that she
was drowned. You have brought me back to life."

"Who are you?" I asked roughly.

"I am a man from Archangel," he said simply: "a Russian man."

"What is your name?"

"Ourganeff."

"Ourganeff!—and hers is Sophie Ramusine. She is no wife of yours. She has no
ring."

"We are man and wife in the sight of Heaven," he said solemnly, looking
upwards. "We are bound by higher laws than those of earth." As he spoke the
girl slipped behind me and caught me by the other hand, pressing it as though
beseeching my protection. "Give me up my wife, sir," he went on. "Let me take
her away from here."

"Look here, you—whatever your name is," I said sternly, "I don't want this
wench here. I wish I had never seen her. If she died it would be no grief to
me. But as to handing her over to you, when it is clear she fears and hates
you, I won't do it. So now just clear your great body out of this, and leave
me to my books. I hope I may never look upon your face again."

"You won't give her up to me?" he said hoarsely.

"I'll see you damned first!" I answered.

"Suppose I take her," he cried, his dark face growing darker.

All my tigerish blood flushed up in a moment. I picked up a billet of wood
from beside the fireplace. "Go," I said, in a low voice; "go quick, or I may
do you an injury." He looked at me irresolutely for a moment, and then he left
the house. He came back again in a moment, however, and stood in the doorway
looking in at us.

"Have a heed what you do," he said. "The woman is mine, and I shall have her.
When it comes to blows, a Russian is as good a man as a Scotchman."

"We shall see that," I cried, springing forward, but he was already gone, and
I could see his tall form moving away through the gathering darkness.

For a month or more after this things went smoothly with us. I never spoke to
the Russian girl, nor did she ever address me. Sometimes when I was at work in
my laboratory she would slip inside the door and sit silently there watching
me with her great eyes. At first this intrusion annoyed me, but by degrees,
finding that she made no attempt to distract my attention, I suffered her to
remain. Encouraged by this concession, she gradually came to move the stool on
which she sat nearer and nearer to my table, until, after gaining a little
every day during some weeks, she at last worked her way right up to me, and
used to perch herself beside me whenever I worked. In this position she used,
still without ever obtruding her presence in any way, to make herself very
useful by holding my pens, test-tubes, bottles, etc., and handing me whatever
I wanted, with never-failing sagacity. By ignoring the fact of her being a
human being, and looking upon her as a useful automatic machine, I accustomed
myself to her presence so far as to miss her on the few occasions when she was
not at her post. I have a habit of talking aloud to myself at times when I
work, so as to fix my results better in my mind. The girl must have had a
surprising memory for sounds, for she could always repeat the words which I
let fall in this way, without, of course, understanding in the least what they
meant. I have often been amused at hearing her discharge a volley of chemical
equations and algebraic symbols at old Madge, and then burst into a ringing
laugh when the crone would shake her head, under the impression, no doubt,
that she was being addressed in Russian.

She never went more than a few yards from the house, and indeed never put her
foot over the threshold without looking carefully out of each window, in order
to be sure that there was nobody about. By this I knew that she suspected that
her fellow-countryman was still in the neighbourhood, and feared that he might
attempt to carry her off. She did something else which was significant. I had
an old revolver with some cartridges, which had been thrown away among the
rubbish. She found this one day, and at once proceeded to clean it and oil it.
She hung it up near the door, with the cartridges in a little bag beside it,
and whenever I went for a walk, she would take it down and insist upon my
carrying it with me. In my absence she would always bolt the door. Apart from
her apprehensions she seemed fairly happy, busying herself in helping Madge
when she was not attending upon me. She was wonderfully nimble-fingered and
natty in all domestic duties.

It was not long before I discovered that her suspicions were well founded, and
that this man from Archangel was still lurking in the vicinity. Being restless
one night I rose and peered out of the window. The weather was somewhat
cloudy, and I could barely make out the line of the sea and the loom of my
boat upon the beach. As I gazed, however, and my eyes became accustomed to the
obscurity, I became aware that there was some other dark blur upon the sands,
and that in front of my very door, where certainly there had been nothing of
the sort the preceding night. As I stood at my diamond-paned lattice still
peering and peeping to make out what this might be, a great bank of clouds
rolled slowly away from the face of the moon, and a flood of cold, clear light
was poured down upon the silent bay and the long sweep of its desolate shores.
Then I saw what this was which haunted my doorstep. It was he, the Russian. He
squatted there like a gigantic toad, with his legs doubled under him in
strange Mongolian fashion, and his eyes fixed apparently upon the window of
the room in which the young girl and the housekeeper slept. The light fell
upon his upturned face, and I saw once more the hawk-like grace of his
countenance, with the single deeply-indented line of care upon his brow, and
the protruding beard which marks the passionate nature. My first impulse was
to shoot him as a trespasser, but, as I gazed, my resentment changed into pity
and contempt. "Poor fool," I said to myself, "is it then possible that you,
whom I have seen looking open-eyed at present death, should have your whole
thoughts and ambition centred upon this wretched slip of a girl—a girl, too,
who flies from you and hates you! Most women would love you—were it but for
that dark face and great handsome body of yours—and yet you must needs hanker
after the one in a thousand who will have no traffic with you." As I returned
to my bed I chuckled much to myself over this thought. I knew that my bars
were strong and my bolts thick. It mattered little to me whether this strange
man spent his night at my door or a hundred leagues off, so long as he was
gone by the morning. As I expected, when I rose and went out there was no sign
of him, nor had he left any trace of his midnight vigil.

It was not long, however, before I saw him again. I had been out for a row one
morning, for my head was aching, partly from prolonged stooping and partly
from the effects of a noxious drug which I had inhaled the night before. I
pulled along the coast some miles, and then, feeling thirsty, I landed at a
place where I knew that a fresh water stream trickled down into the sea. This
rivulet passed through my land, but the mouth of it, where I found myself that
day, was beyond my boundary line. I felt somewhat taken aback when rising from
the stream at which I had slaked my thirst, I found myself face to face with
the Russian. I was as much a trespasser now as he was, and I could see at a
glance that he knew it.

"I wish to speak a few words to you," he said gravely.

"Hurry up, then!" I answered, glancing at my watch. "I have no time to listen
to chatter."

"Chatter!" he repeated angrily. "Ah, but there! You Scotch people are strange
men. Your face is hard and your words rough, but so are those of the good
fishermen with whom I stay, yet I find that beneath it all there lie kind,
honest natures. No doubt you are kind and good too, in spite of your
roughness."

"In the name of the devil," I said, "say your say, and go your way. I am weary
of the sight of you."

"Can I not soften you in any way?" he cried. " Ah, see—see here"—he produced a
small Grecian cross from inside his velvet jacket. "Look at this. Our
religions may differ in form, but at least we have some common thoughts and
feelings when we see this emblem."

"I am not so sure of that," I answered.

He looked at me thoughtfully.

"You are a very strange man," he said at last. "I cannot understand you. You
still stand between me and Sophie. It is a dangerous position to take, sir.
Oh, believe me, before it is too late. If you did but know what I have done to
gain that woman—how I have risked my body, how I have lost my soul. You are a
small obstacle to some which I have surmounted—you, whom a rip with a knife,
or a blow from a stone, would put out of my way for ever. But God preserve me
from that," he cried wildly. "I am deep—too deep—already. Anything rather than
that."

"You would do better to go back to your country," I said, "than to skulk about
these sand-hills and disturb my leisure. When I have proof that you have gone
away I shall hand this woman over to the protection of the Russian Consul at
Edinburgh. Until then, I shall guard her myself, and not you, nor any
Muscovite that ever breathed, shall take her from me."

"And what is your object in keeping me from Sophie?" he asked. "Do you imagine
that I would injure her? Why, man, I would give my life freely to save her
from the slightest harm. Why do you do this thing?"

"I do it because it is my good pleasure to act so," I answered. "I give no man
reasons for my conduct."

"Look here!" he cried, suddenly blazing into fury, and advancing towards me
with his shaggy mane bristling and his brown hands clenched. "If I thought you
had one dishonest thought towards this girl—if for a moment I had reason to
believe that you had any base motive for detaining her—as sure as there is a
God in Heaven I should drag the heart out of your bosom with my hands." The
very idea seemed to have put the man in a frenzy, for his face was all
distorted and his hands opened and shut convulsively. I thought that he was
about to spring at my throat.

"Stand off," I said, putting my hand on my pistol. "If you lay a finger on me
I shall kill you."

He put his hand into his pocket, and for a moment I thought he was about to
produce a weapon too, but instead of that he whipped out a cigarette and lit
it, breathing the smoke rapidly into his lungs. No doubt he had found by
experience that this was the most effectual way of curbing his passions.

"I told you," he said in a quieter voice, "that my name is Ourganeff—Alexis
Ourganeff. I am a Finn by birth, but I have spent my life in every part of the
world. I was one who could never be still, nor settle down to a quiet
existence. After I came to own my own ship there is hardly a port from
Archangel to Australia which I have not entered. I was rough and wild and
free, but there was one at home, sir, who was prim and white-handed and soft-
tongued, skilful in little fancies and conceits which women love. This youth
by his wiles and tricks stole from me the love of the girl whom I had ever
marked as my own, and who up to that time had seemed in some sort inclined to
return my passion. I had been on a voyage to Hammerfest for ivory, and coming
back unexpectedly I learned that my pride and treasure was to be married to
this soft-skinned boy, and that the party had actually gone to the church. In
such moments, sir, something gives way in my head, and I hardly know what I
do. I landed with a boat's crew—all men who had sailed with me for years, and
who were as true as steel. We went up to the church. They were standing, she
and he, before the priest, but the thing had not been done. I dashed between
them and caught her round the waist. My men beat back the frightened
bridegroom and the lookers-on. We bore her down to the boat and aboard our
vessel, and then getting up anchor we sailed away across the White Sea until
the spires of Archangel sank down behind the horizon. She had my cabin, my
room, every comfort. I slept among the men in the forecastle. I hoped that in
time her aversion to me would wear away, and that she would consent to marry
me in England or in France. For days and days we sailed. We saw the North Cape
die away behind us, and we skirted the grey Norwegian coast, but still, in
spite of every attention, she would not forgive me for tearing her from that
pale-faced lover of hers. Then came this cursed storm which shattered both my
ship and my hopes, and has deprived me even of the sight of the woman for whom
I have risked so much. Perhaps she may learn to love me yet. You, sir," he
said wistfully, "look like one who has seen much of the world. Do you not
think that she may come to forget this man and to love me?" "I am tired of
your story," I said, turning away. "For my part, I think you are a great fool.
If you imagine that this love of yours will pass away you had best amuse
yourself as best you can until it does. If, on the other hand, it is a fixed
thing, you cannot do better than cut your throat, for that is the shortest way
out of it. I have no more time to waste on the matter." With this I hurried
away and walked down to the boat. I never looked round, but I heard the dull
sound of his feet upon the sands as he followed me.

"I have told you the beginning of my story," he said, "and you shall know the
end some day. You would do well to let the girl go."

I never answered him, but pushed the boat off. When I had rowed some distance
out I looked back and saw his tall figure upon the yellow sand as he stood
gazing thoughtfully after me. When I looked again, some minutes later, he had
disappeared.

For a long time after this my life was as regular and as monotonous as it had
been before the shipwreck. At times I hoped that the man from Archangel had
gone away altogether, but certain footsteps which I saw upon the sand, and
more particularly a little pile of cigarette ash which I found one day behind
a hillock from which a view of the house might be obtained, warned me that,
though invisible, he was still in the vicinity. My relations with the Russian
girl remained the same as before. Old Madge had been somewhat jealous of her
presence at first, and seemed to fear that what little authority she had would
be taken away from her. By degrees, however, as she came to realise my utter
indifference, she became reconciled to the situation, and, as I have said
before, profited by it, as our visitor performed much of the domestic work.

And now I am coming near the end of this narrative of mine, which I have
written a great deal more for my own amusement than for that of any one else.
The termination of the strange episode in which these two Russians had played
a part was as wild and as sudden as the commencement. The events of one single
night freed me from all my troubles, and left me once more alone with my books
and my studies, as I had been before their intrusion. Let me endeavour to
describe how this came about.

I had had a long day of heavy and wearying work, so that in the evening I
determined upon taking a long walk. When I emerged from the house my attention
was attracted by the appearance of the sea. It lay like a sheet of glass, so
that never a ripple disturbed its surface. Yet the air was filled with that
indescribable moaning sound which I have alluded to before—a sound as though
the spirits of all those who lay beneath those treacherous waters were sending
a sad warning of coming troubles to their brethren in the flesh. The
fishermen's wives along that coast know the eerie sound, and look anxiously
across the waters for the brown sails making for the land. When I heard it I
stepped back into the house and looked at the glass. It was down below 29°.
Then I knew that a wild night was coming upon us.

Underneath the hills where I walked that evening it was dull and chill, but
their summits were rosy-red and the sea was brightened by the sinking sun.
There were no clouds of importance in the sky, yet the dull groaning of the
sea grew louder and stronger. I saw, far to the eastward, a brig beating up
for Wick, with a reef in her topsails. It was evident that her captain had
read the signs of nature as I had done. Behind her a long, lurid haze lay low
upon the water, concealing the horizon. "I had better push on," I thought to
myself, "or the wind may rise before I can get back."

I suppose I must have been at least half a mile from the house when I suddenly
stopped and listened breathlessly. My ears were so accustomed to the noises of
nature, the sighing of the breeze and the sob of the waves, that any other
sound made itself heard at a great distance. I waited, listening with all my
ears. Yes, there it was again—a long-drawn, shrill cry of despair, ringing
over the sands and echoed back from the hills behind me—a piteous appeal for
aid. It came from the direction of my house. I turned and ran back homewards
at the top of my speed, ploughing through the sand, racing over the shingle.
In my mind there was a great dim perception of what had occurred.

About a quarter of a mile from the house there is a high sandhill, from which
the whole country round is visible. When I reached the top of this I paused
for a moment. There was the old grey building—there the boat. Everything
seemed to be as I had left it. Even as I gazed, however, the shrill scream was
repeated, louder than before, and the next moment a tall figure emerged from
my door—the figure of the Russian sailor. Over his shoulder was the white form
of the young girl, and even in his haste he seemed to bear her tenderly and
with gentle reverence. I could hear her wild cries and see her desperate
struggles to break away from him. Behind the couple came my old housekeeper,
staunch and true, as the aged dog, who can no longer bite, still snarls with
toothless gums at the intruder. She staggered feebly along at the heels of the
ravisher, waving her long, thin arms, and hurling, no doubt, volleys of Scotch
curses and imprecations at his head. I saw at a glance that he was making for
the boat. A sudden hope sprang up in my soul that I might be in time to
intercept him. I ran for the beach at the top of my speed. As I ran I slipped
a cartridge into my revolver. This I determined should be the last of these
invasions.

I was too late. By the time I reached the water's edge he was a hundred yards
away, making the boat spring with every stroke of his powerful arms. I uttered
a wild cry of impotent anger, and stamped up and down the sands like a maniac.
He turned and saw me. Rising from his seat he made me a graceful bow, and
waved his hand to me. It was not a triumphant or a derisive gesture. Even my
furious and distempered mind recognised it as being a solemn and courteous
leave-taking. Then he settled down to his oars once more, and the little skiff
shot away out over the bay. The sun had gone down now, leaving a single dull,
red streak upon the water, which stretched away until it blended with the
purple haze on the horizon. Gradually the skiff grew smaller and smaller as it
sped across this lurid band, until the shades of night gathered round it and
it became a mere blur upon the lonely sea. Then this vague loom died away
also, and darkness settled over it — a darkness which should never more be
raised.

And why did I pace the solitary shore, hot and wrathful as a wolf whose whelp
has been torn from it? Was it that I loved this Muscovite girl? No — a
thousand times no. I am not one who, for the sake of a white skin or a blue
eye, would belie my own life, and change the whole tenor of my thoughts and
existence. My heart was untouched. But my pride — ah, there I had been cruelly
wounded. To think that I had been unable to afford protection to the helpless
one who craved it of me, and who relied on me! It was that which made my heart
sick and sent the blood buzzing through my ears.

That night a great wind rose up from the sea, and the wild waves shrieked upon
the shore as though they would tear it back with them into the ocean. The
turmoil and the uproar were congenial to my vexed spirit. All night I wandered
up and down, wet with spray and rain, watching the gleam of the white breakers
and listening to the outcry of the storm. My heart was bitter against the
Russian. I joined my feeble pipe to the screaming of the gale. "If he would
but come back again!" I cried, with clenched hands; "if he would but come
back!"

He came back. When the grey light of morning spread over the eastern sky and
lit up the great waste of yellow, tossing waters, with the brown clouds
drifting swiftly over them, then I saw him once again. A few hundred yards off
along the sand there lay a long dark object, cast up by the fury of the waves.
It was my boat, much shattered and splintered. A little further on, a vague,
shapeless something was washing to and fro in the shallow water, all mixed
with shingle and with seaweed. I saw at a glance that it was the Russian, face
downwards and dead. I rushed into the water and dragged him up on to the
beach. It was only when I turned him over that I discovered that she was
beneath him, his dead arms encircling her, his mangled body still intervening
between her and the fury of the storm. It seemed that the fierce German Sea
might beat the life from him, but with all its strength it was unable to tear
this one-idea'd man from the woman whom he loved. There were signs which led
me to believe that during that awful night the woman's fickle mind had come at
last to learn the worth of the true heart and strong arm which struggled for
her and guarded her so tenderly. Why else should her little head be nestling
so lovingly on his broad breast, while her yellow hair entwined itself with
his flowing beard? Why, too, should there be that bright smile of ineffable
happiness and triumph, which death itself had not had power to banish from his
dusky face? I fancy that death had been brighter to him than life had ever
been.

Madge and I buried them there on the shores of the desolate northern sea. They
lie in one grave deep down beneath the yellow sand. Strange things may happen
in the world around them. Empires may rise and may fall, dynasties may perish,
great wars may come and go, but, heedless of it all, those two shall embrace
each other for ever and aye in their lonely shrine by the side of the sounding
ocean. I sometimes have thought that their spirits flit like shadowy sea-mews
over the wild waters of the bay. No cross or symbol marks their resting-place,
but old Madge puts wild flowers upon it at times; and when I pass on my daily
walk and see the fresh blossoms scattered over the sand, I think of the
strange couple who came from afar and broke for a little space the dull tenor
of my sombre life.

